This tool takes arbitrary numbers of files containing your Free Energy Curves (FECs) and computes their derivatives numerically. It then computes the standard deviation (SD) of the derivative at each point along the curve, writing those values to a specified output file. It will optionally also numerically re-integrate segments of the curve, then compute their SD, to associate each segment with an accumulation of variance across that segment. The edges of these segments are user specified, though the customary use for them would be integrating over each window from which the curve is built to associate accumulations of variance to particular window positions along the reaction coordinate.

This tool computes the numerical derivative as implemented in the numpy gradient method, which is an order 2 accurate method for numerical differentiation that uses forward/backward methods for the boundary points so the gradient has the same number of elements as the input. It uses the scipy implementation of Simpson's method to integrate the curve segments, if they are provided by the user. 

This tool can optionally compute the SD from a best estimate that is not the mean of the data, and can also save the raw derivatives trace. If these behaviors are desired, inspect the flags section of the help statement. Note that all flags other than the one producing this message have abbreviations.

SAMPLE INPUTS

The simplest possible command line might have nothing on it other than the free energy curves you'd like to compare:

./derivative-stats.py curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

This will result in the creation of one file, dstats-sd.asc, which contains the per-bin standard deviaton of the derivative. It's in standard numpy savetxt format, meaning the elements in the first column are the reaction coordinate bins from your free energy curves, and the SD will be in the second column. The units will match whatever units the files in the curves were in, except the SD which will be a force matching the units of energy and extent provided.

If you run this command again you'll find you get an error; this is a safety built in to prevent your overwriting files you've created previously using this tool in a blind fashion. To switch the safety off, throw the overwrite flag:

./derivative-stats.py --overwrite curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

To use a 'best estimate' for the center of your data that is not the mean (for example, a free energy curve produced by pooling the raw data, then applying wham to that pool) for the purpose 

where the curve-i.dat files are placeholders for the files containing the FECs. To change the prefix for this file, add the prefix flag:

./derivative-stats.py --prefix example curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

If you ran this command, you should get a file called example-sd.dat instead of dstats-sd.dat because you've supplied your own prefix. Where prefix is used below here in output file names you can assume it is the prefix specified by this flag.

This tool is designed with the output from Alan Grossfield's WHAM tool in mind. As such, it assumes your reaction coordinate bins will be in the zeroth column of the file, and the free energies for those coordinates will be in the first column. If you would like to modify this behavior, say because your reaction coordinate is in the (zeros based) third column and your free energy is in the second, use the cols flag:

./derivative-stats.py --cols 3 2 curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

You should only give cols two integer arguments. The first of these arguments will indicate the column index of the reaction coordinate, the second the free energy. Later versions of the tool will incorporate additional columns to permit higher dimensional reaction coordinates to be analyzed.


To integrate over curve segments corresponding to windows indicate where the 'edges' of each window are using the integral edges flag, providing a filename for the tool to read them from. For example, assuming your reaction coordinate is a number ranging from 1 to 10 and you have windows of approximate size 1:

$ cat edges.txt
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

./derivative-stats.py --integral-edges edges.txt curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

This will produce a file titled 'prefix-ints.asc' which has the leading edge of each window next to the SD of the integrals over that window across the supplied curves. The units will again be identical to those the curve was provided in.

To save the derivatives from each curve to file throw the derivs flag:

./derivative-stats.py --derivs curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

This will produce three files (because you supplied three curves) called 'prefix-deriv-0.asc', 'prefix-deriv-1.asc', and 'prefix-deriv-2.asc'. The numbering is supplied by the program counting from the first curve to the last curve, in zeros based order. So 'prefix-deriv-0.asc' is the deriviative from curve-1.dat. The filename for the curve files has no bearing on the name of the derivative files, but the order does. If curve-3.dat were listed first on the command line, it would correspond to the file 'prefix-deriv-0.asc' instead. As with the other output files, the data will be written out in columns with the reaction coordinate in the first column and the derivative of the free energy with respect to it in the second. The units will match those of the SD file.

HARDWRAPPED VERSION BELOW HERE. USE THIS AS WYSIWYG input.

	This tool takes arbitrary numbers of files containing your Free
Energy Curves (FECs) and computes their derivatives numerically. It
then computes the standard deviation (SD) of the derivative at each
point along the curve, writing those values to a specified output
file. It will optionally also numerically re-integrate segments of
the curve, then compute their SD, to associate each segment with an
accumulation of variance across that segment. The edges of these
segments are user specified, though the customary use for them
would be integrating over each window from which the curve is built
to associate accumulations of variance to particular window
positions along the reaction coordinate.

	This tool computes the numerical derivative as implemented in
the numpy gradient method, which is an order 2 accurate method for
numerical differentiation that uses forward/backward methods for
the boundary points so the gradient has the same number of elements
as the input. It uses the scipy implementation of Simpson's method
to integrate the curve segments, if they are provided by the user.

	This tool can optionally compute the SD from a best estimate
that is not the mean of the data, and can also save the raw
derivatives trace. If these behaviors are desired, inspect the
flags section of the help statement. Note that all flags other than
the one producing this message have abbreviations.

SAMPLE INPUTS

	The simplest possible command line might have nothing on it
other than the free energy curves you'd like to compare:

./derivative-stats.py curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

	This will result in the creation of one file, dstats-sd.asc,
which contains the per-bin standard deviaton of the derivative.
It's in standard numpy savetxt format, meaning the elements in the
first column are the reaction coordinate bins from your free energy
curves, and the SD will be in the second column. The units will
match whatever units the files in the curves were in, except the SD
which will be a force matching the units of energy and extent
provided.

	If you run this command again you'll find you get an error;
this is a safety built in to prevent your overwriting files you've
created previously using this tool in a blind fashion. To switch
the safety off, throw the overwrite flag:

./derivative-stats.py --overwrite curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

	To use a 'best estimate' for the center of your data that is
not the mean (for example, a free energy curve produced by pooling
the raw data, then applying wham to that pool) for the purpose

	where the curve-i.dat files are placeholders for the files
containing the FECs. To change the prefix for this file, add the
prefix flag:

./derivative-stats.py --prefix example curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

	If you ran this command, you should get a file called
example-sd.dat instead of dstats-sd.dat because you've supplied
your own prefix. Where prefix is used below here in output file
names you can assume it is the prefix specified by this flag.

	This tool is designed with the output from Alan Grossfield's
WHAM tool in mind. As such, it assumes your reaction coordinate
bins will be in the zeroth column of the file, and the free
energies for those coordinates will be in the first column. If you
would like to modify this behavior, say because your reaction
coordinate is in the (zeros based) third column and your free
energy is in the second, use the cols flag:

./derivative-stats.py --cols 3 2 curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

	You should only give cols two integer arguments. The first of
these arguments will indicate the column index of the reaction
coordinate, the second the free energy. Later versions of the tool
will incorporate additional columns to permit higher dimensional
reaction coordinates to be analyzed.


	To integrate over curve segments corresponding to windows
indicate where the 'edges' of each window are using the integral
edges flag, providing a filename for the tool to read them from.
For example, assuming your reaction coordinate is a number ranging
from 1 to 10 and you have windows of approximate size 1:

	$ cat edges.txt 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

./derivative-stats.py --integral-edges edges.txt curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

	This will produce a file titled 'prefix-ints.asc' which has the
leading edge of each window next to the SD of the integrals over
that window across the supplied curves. The units will again be
identical to those the curve was provided in.

	To save the derivatives from each curve to file throw the
derivs flag:

./derivative-stats.py --derivs curve-1.dat curve-2.dat curve-3.dat

	This will produce three files (because you supplied three
curves) called 'prefix-deriv-0.asc', 'prefix-deriv-1.asc', and
'prefix-deriv-2.asc'. The numbering is supplied by the program
counting from the first curve to the last curve, in zeros based
order. So 'prefix-deriv-0.asc' is the deriviative from curve-1.dat.
The filename for the curve files has no bearing on the name of the
derivative files, but the order does. If curve-3.dat were listed
first on the command line, it would correspond to the file
'prefix-deriv-0.asc' instead. As with the other output files, the
data will be written out in columns with the reaction coordinate in
the first column and the derivative of the free energy with respect
to it in the second. The units will match those of the SD file.